web: revised the README to be more of an onboarding document (#20776)
goauthentik/authentik: web/README.md

# The authentik WebUI

The authetik WebUI is the default UI for the authentik Single Sign-on (SSO) server. It consists of

> three primary applications:

Author: I've long been uncomfortable with the word "interfaces" in our lexicon.  I really wish we could change it to "application."  

An "application" is "software intended to assist the end-user in accomplishing a specific task."  A "web application" is one that does that using the browser as the UI.  We have three specific tasks: Logging in and out (_Flow_), giving internal users a catalog of available applications they can reach from our product (_User_), and letting site owners administer their users, applications, and sources (_Admin_).  

"Interface" is a leftover from when Jens had three different APIs, with different layers of security, for those three things.  This is why I used "application" here: it is what it is.

- Flow: The transaction-driven interface for logging in and other activities

> - User: The user's library of applications to which they have access, and some user settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User: The user's library of applications to which they have access, and user settings such as configuring MFA, email address, viewing current sessions, and more
```

- Admin: The system adminstration tool for defining applications, providers, policies, and
  everything else

Each of these is a [thin client] around data objects provided by and transactions available with
the authentik SSO server.

The authentik SSO server is written in Python and Django.

> - [thin client](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thin_client): In this case, we mean "a front end to
>   show the data where the server does all the heavy lifting."

## Project setup

If you have cloned the authentik repository, the [developer docs] are where you go to perform the
initial set-up and install. This sequence will get you up and running in the usual course of events.

```

> $ make install

Author: I kinda want to go the other way and remove them from the dev docs.  I want the documentation to live _where the developer is_, and that's right here in the working codebase, not over in their browser. We can talk about this; it's a bias I have.

$ make gen-dev-config
$ make migrate
$ make run-server
$ make run-worker
```

We recommend that you run `run-server` and `run-worker` in different terminals or different sessions
under tmux or screen or a similar terminal multiplexer.

> The WebUI runs in this folder (`./web` under the project root). You can put the WebUI into hot

Reviewer: Have we introduced a component called "WebUI "yet? Or do you mean just the generic use of the term, like "web-based UI"? People could think you mean https://webui.me/, or the new OpenAI WebUI...

It is a bit confusing as it is now... If you mean the generic term., let's say "web-based UI". If you mean a real thing called exactly that, then link to it or describe it more.

Author: Good point; it's just a term I use in my head, it shouldn't have leaked into the document.  How about "the authentik web-based applications are ..." instead?

sequence of startup operations:

- Assigns the language code and `data-theme="light|dark"` settings to the `html` tag. Assigns the
  favicon links. Creates a `window.authentik` object and assigns a variety of site-wide
  configuration details to it. Probes the a priority decision list of sources of the user's
  light/dark preferences and assigns that to the `Document.dataset`
- Begins loading the interface root bundle. The script is of `type="module"`; it will not be
  executed until the initial HTML has been completely parsed.
- Loads the site-wide standard CSS.
- Injects any CSS overrides specified in the customer's `brand` settings
- Loads any necessary JavaScript polyfills
- Dispatches any initial messages to the notification handler
- Sets any custom `<meta>` settings specified by the server
- Provides the initial HTML scaffolding to launch an interface.

The interface code is mostly the core web component and its responsibilities. This code will be
hydrated when the interface root bundle in the second step above is executed and the components are
registered with the browser.

### The Flow Interface

> The Flow Interface has three subsystems:

Reviewer: We want to match what it is called in the UI and in the Docs.

> The Flow Interface has three subsystems:

Author: Understood.

- The Locale Selector: `<ak-locale-select>`
- The Flow Inspector: `<ak-flow-inspector>`
- The Flow Executor: `<ak-flow-executor>`

> The Locale Selector and the Inspector are independent buttons that exist on the page (both can

Reviewer: this phrase seems a bit vague.. what page? And the Inspector is only shown in upper right under certain circumstances., right? (Though it is shown on a Flow overview page, midway down...)...

enabled, can query the server for details about the state of a flow: the accumulated context of the
current flow, existing error messages, and expected next steps; it is present to assist with
debugging.

The Executor is the heart of the system. It executes Flows.

A _Flow_ in authentik is the workflow that accomplishes a specific SSO-oriented task such as logging
in, logging out, or enrolling as a new user, among other tasks.

The Executor starts by examining the current URL for the `flowSlug`, and sends a request for a
_Challenge_ to the server. Upon the response, the Executor loads the corresponding _Stage_: the UI
component responsible for showing the challenge to the user. When the user performs the requested
action the input is sent to the server, which issues a new Challenge. This Challenge may be the same
one with error messages, or the next one in the workflow. This process repeats until the user
reaches the end of the Flow, at which point the task is complete or failed.

The architecture for the Executor is straightforward:

- The HTML Document
    - The Locale Selector
    - The Inspector
    - The Executor
        - The current Stage

> A Stage may have interior stages or components. The Identification Stage is the most complex of our

Author: Not here, I don't think. That seems like a complication, something to be discovered afterward.

    - Capabilities: a list of features that the current user may use. List includes "can save
      reports," "can use debugging feature," "can use enterprise features."
    - The Application:
        - Header
        - Sidebar
        - Router
            - CRUD interfaces to features of the system:
                - Dashboard
                - Logs
                - Configurations
                    - Flows, Stages & Policies
                    - Users & Group
                    - IDP Sources
                    - Everything else!

### Miscellaneous Interfaces

There are three miscellaneous interfaces:

#### API Browser

A single page app that loads our schema and allows the user to experiment with it. Uses the
[RapiDoc](https://rapidocweb.com/) app.

#### Loading

The Django application is wrapped in a proxy server for caching and performance; while it is in
start-up mode, the proxy serves this page, which just says "The application is loading" with a
pretty animation.

#### SFE: Simplified Flow Executor

The SFE is a limited version of the FlowExecutor written to use [jQuery](https://jquery.com/). It

> supports only log-in operations, and is meant for places where the log-in is embedded in an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
supports only login operations, and is meant for places where the login is embedded in an
```

Office365 or MicrosoftTeams settings, as those use Trident (Internet Explorer) for their web-based
log-in.

## WebUI Foundations

### CSS

Our current CSS is provided by [Patternfly 4](https://v4-archive.patternfly.org/v4/). There are two
different layers of CSS.

The first is the Global CSS that appears in the `<head>`. This defines the basic look: theme,
start-up, reset, and fonts. It also provides the CSS Custom Properties that will control the look
and feel of the rest of an Interface.

> 

Reviewer: You could link to the docs that Teffen wrote (https://docs.goauthentik.io/brands/custom-css/).

        return html`<ak-form-element-horizontal label=${msg("Name")} required name="name">
            <input
                type="text"
                value="${ifDefined(this.instance?.name)}"
                class="pf-c-form-control"
                required
            />
        </ak-form-element-horizontal>`;
    }

```

The `send` shows two different modes: If the existing instance has an identity, this is an update;
otherwise it's a creation request.

These are _simple_ examples, naturally, and our application can get much more complicated. The
`./admin/flows` vertical is one of the most complex, including:

- A per-flow view page with a [Mermaid](https://mermaid.js.org/) diagram to show a Flow's Stages
- A sub-table of the Flow's Policies, with the ability to edit each Policy or its Bindings
- A sub-table of the Flow's Stages with the ability to edit each Stage or a Stage's Binding directly
- A sub-table of the Flow's Permissions

## Choosing To Use A Custom Component (developer's guide)

Some of our server-side objects come with lists. When editing a list, we suggest:

- If it's a simple list and there's only one choice, use `<select>`

> - If it's from the server and it's possible there are more than 100 items, use SearchSelect. It

Reviewer: Is the `SearchSelect` thingy a field, a flag a funciton...? Let's add what it is right after the name, please. And for components, etc. we use code font.
